---
sidebar_position: 3
---

# 9.2 - Conservation of Electrical Energy

As we have observed, a lot of concepts in electricity and magnetism are conceptually similar to mechanics, but with electric fields and forces. Conservation of electrical energy is no different. We will first start by reviewing the conservation of mechanical energy.

## 9.2.1 - Conservation of Mechanical Energy, A Review

We know that in closed, isolated systems with no nonconservative forces doing work, the total mechanical energy in a system is constant.

Total mechanical energy is the sum of potential and kinetic energy: $E_{mech} = U+K$

The change in mechanical energy is 0: $\Delta E_{mech} = 0$

Therefore, the change in potential energy and kinetic energy must be 0: $\Delta U + \Delta K = 0$

The change in potential energy is equal and opposite to the change in kinetic energy: $\Delta U = -\Delta K$

## 9.2.2 - Conservation of Electrical Energy In Depth

$\Delta V = \frac{\Delta U_{E}}{q}$

$\Delta V$ is the potential difference and $\Delta U_{E}$ is the change in electrica potential energy.

:::info[Sample Question]

A proton with a charge $q = 1.6 \times 10^{-19} C$, a mass of $m_{p} = 1.67 \times 10^{-27} \space kg$, and an initial speed of $v_{i} = 2 \times 10^{5} \space m/s$. The proton enters a region of space where charged particles have created a potential difference. What is the proton’s final speed, $v_{f}$, after it has moved through a potential difference $\Delta V = +200V$

We know that $\Delta V = \frac{\Delta U_{E}}{q}$, so we can rewrite it as $\Delta U_{E} = q\Delta V$

Plugging in our known values, we get $\Delta U_{E} = (1.6 \times 10^{-19} C)(+200 V)$

$\Delta U_{E} = +3.2 \times 10^{-17} \space J$

The next step is to use *energy* to solve for the final velocity. This is just like mechanics.

We already know that $\Delta U = -\Delta K$. Flip it around, and we get $- \Delta K = \Delta U$. Make the change in kinetic energy positive to get: $\Delta K = - \Delta U$. We know that we are working with electrical potential energy, so our final equation will be $\Delta K = - \Delta U_{E}$.

So we know that $\Delta K = - \Delta U_{E}$. And we also know that $\Delta U_{E}$ is because we solved it earlier. We get the following equation:

$\Delta K = - \Delta U_{E} = -3.2 \times 10^{-17} \space J$. Remember, the electrical potential energy has a *negative* sign before it, so we have to flip our result.

Just like mechanics, the formula for the change in kinetic energy remains the same:

$\Delta K = \frac{1}{2} mv_{f}^{2} - \frac{1}{2} mv_{i}^{2}$

We have all the unknowns needed, so let’s substitute and solve:

$$$

\Delta K = \frac{1}{2} mv_{f}^{2} - \frac{1}{2} mv_{i}^{2}

-3.2 \times 10^{-17} \space J = \frac{1}{2} mv_{f}^{2} - \frac{1}{2} mv_{i}^{2}

-3.2 \times 10^{-17} \space J = \frac{1}{2} mv_{f}^{2} - \frac{1}{2} m(2 \times 10^{5} \space \frac{m}{s})^{2}

-3.2 \times 10^{-17} \space J = \frac{1}{2} (1.67 \times 10^{-27} \space kg)v_{f}^{2} - \frac{1}{2} (1.67 \times 10^{-27} \space kg)(2 \times 10^{5} \space \frac{m}{s})^{2}

$$$

This equation looks scary, but CAS can take care of it! (Unless you’re up for an algebra challenge)

$v_{f} = 4.095\times10^{4} \space \frac{m}{s}$

:::

As derived in the sample question above, we have a new key equation:

:::tip[Key Equation]

\Delta K = \frac{1}{2} mv_{f}^{2} - \frac{1}{2} mv_{i}^{2} = -\Delta U_{E}

:::
